README.md, before:

# dymon
Command line tool and printserver (webserver) for DYMO LabelWriter Wireless.
Furthermore this project contains protocol description to interface with DYMO LabelWriter Wireless.

`dymon_srv` implements a webserver, that allows printing of labels through a REST-API. In addition it serves a site (which is using this REST-API) that allows label printing from by a web form:
![dymon_srv](doc/webif.png)

`dymon_cli` and `dymon_bmp` allows printing of labels from command line.


## Intro
2018 I bought DYMO's new wireless label printer (*LabelWriter Wireless*). I had the idea to print labels out of an (web)application
containing data like numbers and barcodes dynamically retrieved from a database.

My starting point was the DYMO's LabelWriter SDK. Unfortunately there was little information for LabelWriter Wireless. If found
*LabelWriter 450 Series Printers Technical Reference Manual* via Google but none for *LabelWriter Wireless*. I get in contact with
DYMO's support and asked for a *Reference Manual* for *LabelWriter Wireless* but I got only the one for *LabelWriter 450*.

The *Reference Manual* for *LabelWriter 450 Series Printers* had some useful information but not exactly that what I wanted to know. Searching
around the internet ended up in two interessting projects whose sourcecode contains additional informaiton:
- https://sbronner.com/dymoprint.html
- https://github.com/computerlyrik/dymoprint

Nevertheless I still didn't have all required information to "operatate" the *LabelWriter Wireless* out of my own application.
So it was time for *Wireshark* to capture the communication between the DYMO's label creater software *DYMO Label* and *LabelWriter Wireless*...
To make it short: Based on the information provided in the resouces noted above I managed it to figure out the majority of the TCP communication protocol.


## Findings
For communiction with the *LabelWriter Wireless* TCP port 9100 is used. This makes sense, because port 9100 is reserved for PDL (page description language)
data streams, used for printing to certain network printers. Communicatin is **NOT** encrypted.

The printer implements a kind of *ESC* protocol. The commands are similar as specified in *LabelWriter 450 Series Printers Technical Reference Manual* but not in all cases. Also there are commands, that
aren't described in this document.

Each command starts with `0x1B` followed by a "command selector byte" and optional parameter data. These parameter are little endian encoded.

The label itself is given by a bitmap "blob". In a preceeding header some meta information are defined. Among other things the width (number of columns) and height (number of rows) of the bitmap, the label length, print density, print quality...

The bits of the bitmap blob are mapped to label pixels row by row, column by column (Z)
* It starts in upper left corner with bit 7 of the first bitmap-byte.
* The next pixel (1st row, 2nd column) is followed by bit 6 ...
* There is a wrap around at the end of each row ...
* It ends in the lower right corner with bit 0 of the last byte.

> I just testes this with a label width that is a multipel of 8. So the wrap around is at a byte boundary, and there are no unused trailing bits in the blob. Don't know what happens if this isn't considered!?


## Protocol
Example for printing a 272x252 bitmap to a 25mm X 25mm label with 300x300dpi.

1. Open TCP connection

2. Get status of printer
   1. `0x1B, 0x41, 1` : Send a TCP packet containing 3 bytes (2 byte command, 1 unknown byte)
   2. Receive reply from printer (32 bytes, whose meaning is not known, yet!)

3. Send label data as **ONE** blob
   Either one big packet or multible packets with (all packets but the last) MSG_MORE flag set.

   1. Set "header data" of label to be print (may be one packet with MSG_MORE)
      1. `0x1B, 0x41, 1, 0, 0, 0` : Counter, 2 byte command, 32-bit value (meaning of counter unknown)
      2. `0x1B, 0x43, 0x64` : Print-Density, 2 byte command, 1 byte value (0x64 ^= normal)
      3. `0x1B, 0x4C, 0x58, 0x02` Label-Length in 1/600 inch, 2 byte command, 16-bit value (e.g 1 inch ^= 600 ^= 0x258 ^= [0x58, 0x02])
      4. `0x1B, 0x43` : Printer quality (300x300 dpi)
      5. `0x1B, 0x4D, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0` : Media/Paper-Type, 2 byte command, 8 byte value (8x0 ^= normal)
      6. `0x1B, 0x68` : Unknown 2 byte command
      7. `0x1B, 0x6E, 1, 0` : Label index, 2 byte command, 16-bit value (meaning of index unknown)
      8. `0x1B, 0x44, 0x01, 0x02, 0xFC, 0, 0, 0, 0x10, 0x01, 0, 0` : Bitmap spec, 2 byte command, 2 unknown bytes, 32-bit bitmap height, 32-bit bitmap width (height 252px = 0xFC ^= [0xFC, 0, 0, 0]; width 272px = 0x110 ^= [0x10, 0x01, 0, 0])

   2. Send bitmap "blob" (may be next packet with MSG_MORE)

   3. Send "footer data" of label (last packet of blob - MSG_MORE clear!)
      1. `0x1B, 0x47` : Short form feed, 2 byte command
      2. `0x1B, 0x41, 0` : Get status, 2 byte command, 1 unknown byte

4. Receive reply from printer (32 bytes, whose meaning is not known, yet!)

5. Send a TCP packet containing following data to output label
   1. `0x1B, 0x45` : Line feed, 2 byte command
   2. `0x1B, 0x51` : Line tab, 2 byte command

6. Close TCP connection


> Label length is user for form feed. Its scale is 600dpi. In this example: 600 dots * 600 dpi = 1 inch = 25 mm.


## Implementation
This porject implements to applications. One application is a command line tool the other is a webserver. Both applications allows to print labels on a DYMO LabelWrite Wireless.

Most of the application code relates to the creation of the bitmap (text and barcode). The actual code to interface with the *LabelWriter* can be found in the files in folder `dymon` and in `src/print.cpp`.

## Notes
- *Dymon* is an abstact class. There is a specialization for Windows and one for Linux. Those child classes only handles the TCP network access.
- To change the oriantation of the label, the bitmap must be rotated. The bitmap class in this project demostrates this.
- To get an idea how to change the label size/format have a look into `src/print.cpp`. There is an implementation for two different label formats with different orientation.


## How to build
Build process is based on CMake.

1. Create a build directory (e.g. `mkdir build`)
2. Within the build directory execute `cmake ..`
3. Within the build directory execute `make`


## Usage
### dymon_cli
The `dymon_cli` tool expects its input via command line argument:
- 1st argument: the IP of the *LabelWriter* in the local network
- 2nd argument: the labels *title* line
- 3rd/4th argument: label *body* lines
- 5th argument: EAN8 barcode value (max 7 digits. a checksum char is added automatically).

Example:
```
./dymon_cli "192.168.178.49" "Headline is bigger" "than the following..." "...two body lines" 1234567
```


### dymon_bmp
`dymon_bmp` is a command line tool, that allows to print a 1-bit bitmap file (binary blob) on the *LabelWriter*.
The tool expects the following arguments:
- 1st argument: the IP of the *LabelWriter* in the local network
- 2nd argument: the bitmap width in pixels (resolution will be 300dpi)
- 3rd argument: the bitmap height in pixels (resolution will be 300dpi)
- 4th argument: label length in millimeter
- 5th argument: full path to the bitmap file

Example to print to a 25mm x 25mm label, which has a width of 272pixel, a height of 252pixel and a lenght of 25.4mm:
```
./dymon_bmp 192.168.178.23 272 252 25.4 ../doc/label.bmp
```


### dymon_srv
`dymon_srv` implements a HTTP-webserver. It TCP port, the webserver is listening to can be set with the first command line argument (default: 8092).
Start the webserver like showen in the example below. Then open you webbrowser to `localost:8092`. Fill in the form data and click the respective button to print the label(s).

Example:
```
./dymon_srv 8092
```

![dymon_srv](doc/webif.png)

Commit message:

replaced dymon_bmp by dymon_pbm. this is almost the same app, but this app used a standardized file format in input (pbm P4). adapted to docu how to deal with that and how to generate pbm files using gimp and imagemagick.

README.md, after:

# dymon
Command line tools and printserver (webserver) for DYMO LabelWriter Wireless.

![dymon_srv](doc/lw.jpg)

This project implements 3 applications:
- `dymon_cli` and `dymon_pmb` allows printing of labels from command line.
- `dymon_srv` implements a webserver, that allows printing of labels through a REST-API. In addition it serves a site (which is using this REST-API) that allows label printing from by a web form:

![dymon_srv](doc/webif.png)



## Intro
2018 I bought DYMO's new wireless label printer (*LabelWriter Wireless*). I had the idea to print labels out of an (web)application
containing data like numbers and barcodes dynamically retrieved from a database.

My starting point was the DYMO's LabelWriter SDK. Unfortunately there was little information for LabelWriter Wireless. If found
*LabelWriter 450 Series Printers Technical Reference Manual* via Google but none for *LabelWriter Wireless*. I get in contact with
DYMO's support and asked for a *Reference Manual* for *LabelWriter Wireless* but I got only the one for *LabelWriter 450*.

The *Reference Manual* for *LabelWriter 450 Series Printers* had some useful information but not exactly that what I wanted to know. Searching
around the internet ended up in two interessting projects whose sourcecode contains additional informaiton:
- https://sbronner.com/dymoprint.html
- https://github.com/computerlyrik/dymoprint

Nevertheless I still didn't have all required information to "operatate" the *LabelWriter Wireless* out of my own application.
So it was time for *Wireshark* to capture the communication between the DYMO's label creater software *DYMO Label* and *LabelWriter Wireless*...
To make it short: Based on the information provided in the resouces noted above I managed it to figure out the majority of the TCP communication protocol.


## Findings
For communiction with the *LabelWriter Wireless* TCP port 9100 is used. This makes sense, because port 9100 is reserved for PDL (page description language)
data streams, used for printing to certain network printers. Communicatin is **NOT** encrypted.

The printer implements a kind of *ESC* protocol. The commands are similar as specified in *LabelWriter 450 Series Printers Technical Reference Manual* but not in all cases. Also there are commands, that
aren't described in this document.

Each command starts with `0x1B` followed by a "command selector byte" and optional parameter data. These parameter are little endian encoded.

The label itself is given by a bitmap "blob". In a preceeding header some meta information are defined. Among other things the width (number of columns) and height (number of rows) of the bitmap, the label length, print density, print quality...

The bits of the bitmap blob are mapped to label pixels row by row, column by column (Z)
* It starts in upper left corner with bit 7 of the first bitmap-byte.
* The next pixel (1st row, 2nd column) is followed by bit 6 ...
* There is a wrap around at the end of each row ...
* It ends in the lower right corner with bit 0 of the last byte.

> I just testes this with a label width that is a multipel of 8. So the wrap around is at a byte boundary, and there are no unused trailing bits in the blob. Don't know what happens if this isn't considered!?


## Protocol
Example for printing a 272x252 bitmap to a 25mm X 25mm label with 300x300dpi.

1. Open TCP connection

2. Get status of printer
   1. `0x1B, 0x41, 1` : Send a TCP packet containing 3 bytes (2 byte command, 1 unknown byte)
   2. Receive reply from printer (32 bytes, whose meaning is not known, yet!)

3. Send label data as **ONE** blob
   Either one big packet or multible packets with (all packets but the last) MSG_MORE flag set.

   1. Set "header data" of label to be print (may be one packet with MSG_MORE)
      1. `0x1B, 0x41, 1, 0, 0, 0` : Counter, 2 byte command, 32-bit value (meaning of counter unknown)
      2. `0x1B, 0x43, 0x64` : Print-Density, 2 byte command, 1 byte value (0x64 ^= normal)
      3. `0x1B, 0x4C, 0x58, 0x02` Label-Length in 1/600 inch, 2 byte command, 16-bit value (e.g 1 inch ^= 600 ^= 0x258 ^= [0x58, 0x02])
      4. `0x1B, 0x43` : Printer quality (300x300 dpi)
      5. `0x1B, 0x4D, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0` : Media/Paper-Type, 2 byte command, 8 byte value (8x0 ^= normal)
      6. `0x1B, 0x68` : Unknown 2 byte command
      7. `0x1B, 0x6E, 1, 0` : Label index, 2 byte command, 16-bit value (meaning of index unknown)
      8. `0x1B, 0x44, 0x01, 0x02, 0xFC, 0, 0, 0, 0x10, 0x01, 0, 0` : Bitmap spec, 2 byte command, 2 unknown bytes, 32-bit bitmap height, 32-bit bitmap width (height 252px = 0xFC ^= [0xFC, 0, 0, 0]; width 272px = 0x110 ^= [0x10, 0x01, 0, 0])

   2. Send bitmap "blob" (may be next packet with MSG_MORE)

   3. Send "footer data" of label (last packet of blob - MSG_MORE clear!)
      1. `0x1B, 0x47` : Short form feed, 2 byte command
      2. `0x1B, 0x41, 0` : Get status, 2 byte command, 1 unknown byte

4. Receive reply from printer (32 bytes, whose meaning is not known, yet!)

5. Send a TCP packet containing following data to output label
   1. `0x1B, 0x45` : Line feed, 2 byte command
   2. `0x1B, 0x51` : Line tab, 2 byte command

6. Close TCP connection


> Label length is user for form feed. Its scale is 600dpi. In this example: 600 dots * 600 dpi = 1 inch = 25 mm.

> The bitmap blob seems to match the *pbm P4* format (see https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Netpbm_format)

## Implementation
This porject implements to applications. One application is a command line tool the other is a webserver. Both applications allows to print labels on a DYMO LabelWrite Wireless.

Most of the application code relates to the creation of the bitmap (text and barcode). The actual code to interface with the *LabelWriter* can be found in the files in folder `dymon` and in `src/print.cpp`.

## Notes
- *Dymon* is an abstact class. There is a specialization for Windows and one for Linux. Those child classes only handles the TCP network access.
- To change the oriantation of the label, the bitmap must be rotated. The bitmap class in this project demostrates this.
- To get an idea how to change the label size/format have a look into `src/print.cpp`. There is an implementation for two different label formats with different orientation.


## How to build
Build process is based on CMake.

1. Create a build directory (e.g. `mkdir build`)
2. Within the build directory execute `cmake ..`
3. Within the build directory execute `make`


## Usage
### dymon_cli
The `dymon_cli` tool expects its input via command line argument:
- 1st argument: the IP of the *LabelWriter* in the local network
- 2nd argument: the labels *title* line
- 3rd/4th argument: label *body* lines
- 5th argument: EAN8 barcode value (max 7 digits. a checksum char is added automatically).

Example:
```
./dymon_cli "192.168.178.49" "Headline is bigger" "than the following..." "...two body lines" 1234567
```


### dymon_pmb
`dymon_pmb` is a command line tool, that allows to print *pmb P4* image files. on the *LabelWriter*.
The tool expects the following arguments:
- 1st argument: the IP of the *LabelWriter* in the local network
- 2th argument: full path to the bitmap file

In folder `doc` you can find some example files that can be printed (on the respective lables) like this:
```
./dymon_pmb 192.168.178.23 ../doc/label_25x25.pbm
./dymon_pmb 192.168.178.23 ../doc/manu_25x25.pbm
./dymon_pmb 192.168.178.23 ../doc/eagle_25x25.pbm
./dymon_pmb 192.168.178.23 ../doc/eagle_36x89.pbm
```

You can use *GIMP* to convert regular image files into pmb files. Therefore just *export* your image as `filename.pbm` and store it as *raw* pmb.
You can also use *Imagemagick* to convert a file into pmb. For example:
```
convert your_pic.jpg your_pic.pbm
```

You can also do more advanced conversion at once using *Imagemagick's convert*. The following command resizes an image but keeps the aspect ration. It will be resized so that the width is maximal 960 pixel, the height is maximal 400 pixel. It depends on the geometry of the input image which rule applies. Then it extends the canvas to 960x400 and aligns the image centered in the canvas. Then the image is rotated by 90 degrees (counter clockwise). Finally it is converted to pbm p4. The resulting image would fit to a 36mm x 89mm label.
```
convert -resize 960x400 -extent 960x400 -gravity center -rotate 90 eagle.jpg eagle_36x89.pbm
```



### dymon_srv
`dymon_srv` implements a HTTP-webserver. It TCP port, the webserver is listening to can be set with the first command line argument (default: 8092).
Start the webserver like showen in the example below. Then open you webbrowser to `localost:8092`. Fill in the form data and click the respective button to print the label(s).

Example:
```
./dymon_srv 8092
```

![dymon_srv](doc/webif.png)
